>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, APRIL 16:
POPE FRANCIS TAKES TWELVE
REFUGEES WITH HIM BACK TO ITALY
FOLLOWING HIS VISIT TO GREECE;
HOW ONE RUST BELT CITY IS TRYING
TO SAVE ITSELF, ONE HOUSE AT A
TIME.
>> WE DON'T GO AROUND HERE
TALKING ABOUT UTOPIAN VISIONS.
WE'VE JUST GOT TO GET
NEIGHBORHOODS CLEANED UP.
>> Stewart: AND, JEFF GREENFIELD
CONSIDERS THE "FAIRNESS" OF OUR
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
EMOTIONS RAN HIGH TODAY ON THE
GREEK ISLAND OF LESBOS, AS POPE
FRANCIS VISITED A CAMP WHERE
3,000 MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES
AWAIT DEPORTATION TO TURKEY
UNDER A DEAL WITH THE EUROPEAN
UNION.
POPE FRANCIS SHOOK HANDS WITH
HUNDREDS OF THE MIGRANTS, MANY
WEEPING AND BEGGING FOR HIS
HELP, SOME CHANTING THE WORD
"FREEDOM."
THE POPE ASKED FOR UNITY IN
HELPING PEOPLE FLEEING CONFLICTS
IN SYRIA, AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ, AND
ELSEWHERE.
>> (translated): WE NEED TO
ELIMINATE THE CAUSES OF THIS
DRAMATIC SITUATION; IT IS NOT
ENOUGH TO LIMIT OURSELVES TO
RESPONDING TO EMERGENCIES AS
THEY ARISE.
INSTEAD, WE NEED TO ENCOURAGE
POLITICAL EFFORTS THAT ARE
BROADER IN SCOPE AND
MULTILATERAL.
IT IS NECESSARY, ABOVE ALL, TO
BUILD PEACE WHERE WAR HAS
BROUGHT DESTRUCTION AND DEATH.
>> Stewart: POPE FRANCIS AND
OTHER RELIGIOUS LEADERS TOSSED
WREATHS INTO THE AEGEAN SEA, TO
COMMEMORATE THE HUNDREDS OF
PEOPLE WHO HAVE DIED TRYING TO
REACH EUROPE IN DANGEROUS
CROSSINGS ON FLIMSY BOATS.
IN WHAT HE CALLED A HUMANITARIAN
GESTURE, THE POPE BROUGHT 12
SYRIAN MUSLIMS, INCLUDING SIX
CHILDREN, WITH HIM WHEN HE FLEW
BACK TO ROME.
HE SAID THE VATICAN WOULD TAKE
CARE OF THE REFUGEES, WHOSE
HOMES WERE BOMBED IN THE SYRIAN
CIVIL WAR.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MALCOLM BRABANT IS IN LESBOS AND
JOINS ME NOW.
MALCOLM, WHAT WAS THE
PURPOSE OF THE POPE'S VISIT?
WHAT PROMPTED HIM COMING RIGHT
NOW TO THAT ISLAND?
>> THIS IS ENTIRELY CONSISTENT
WITH POPE FRANCIS' DESIRE TO
THRUST HIMSELF INTO THE FRONT
LINES OF SITUATIONS AROUND THE
WORLD WHICH NEED ATTENTION DRAWN
TO THEM.
HE'S BEEN TO THE CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC.
AND HE NEEDED TO COME TO LESBOS
TO SHOW SOLIDARITY WITH THE
GREEK PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
TAKING ON THIS ENORMOUS BURDEN,
BUT MOST OF ALL, HE WANTED TO
COME AND LOOK IN THE EYES OF THE
REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS WHO WERE
HERE TO SHOW THEM THEY MUSTN'T
GIVE UP HOPE, THAT HE HAS GREAT
AFFECTION FOR THEM, BUT ALSO
SEND THE MESSAGE TO THE REST OF
THE WORLD THEY SHOULD NOT BE
REJECTED.
>> Stewart: WAS IT SEEN AS A
CRITIQUE OF EUROPEAN POLICY?
>> THE VATICAN WAS AT PAINS TO
POINT OUT THAT THIS WAS NOT A
CRITIQUE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION'S
DEAL WITH TURKEY, WHO CAN SEND
PEOPLE BACK ON THIS ISLAND AFTER
MARCH 20.
BUT HE COULDN'T HAVE ISSUED A
STRONGER REBUKE WITH THE ACT HE
LEFT THE AIRPORT.
HE TOOK 12 SYRIAN REFUGEES WITH
HIM BACK TO THE VATICAN, THREE
FAMILIES, TWO FROM DAMASCUS,
ANOTHER FROM AN AREA TO THE EAST
OF THE COUNTRY, WHICH IS UNDER
THE CONTROL OF ISLAMIC STATE.
AND BASICALLY, WHAT HE WAS
SAYING BY TAKING THOSE PEOPLE IN
WAS THAT EUROPE SHOULD DO THE
SAME.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE REALITY OF
WHAT'S HAPPENING ON THE GROUND
VERSUS WHAT THE POPE SAW WHILE
HE WAS THERE.
>> WELL, THERE WAS SOME
SANITIZATION HERE.
IT HAS TO BE SAID.
YOU HAVE SEEN PICTURES OF THEM
WHITEWASHING THE WALLS OF THIS
DETENTION CAMP IN THE RUN-UP TO
THE POPE'S VISIT, WHAT WAS
HAPPENING WAS THE REFUGEES HAD
THEIR FIRST SHOWERS IN ABOUT 21
DAYS.
THEY WERE GIVEN EXTRA FOOD SO
THEY WOULDN'T BE HUNGRY,
WOULDN'T COMPLAIN.
THEY WERE GIVEN FRESH CLOTHES.
BUT, ALSO, THERE WERE PAKISTANIS
IN THE CAMP WHO WERE ON HUNGER
STRIKES WHOSE TENTS WERE MOVED
TO THE BACK OF THE CAMP.
THE DEPORTATIONS BACK TO TURKEY
HAVE BEEN PUT ON HOLD.
WHERE I'M STANDING ON LESBOS
HARBOR IS ABOUT 100 METERS AWAY
FROM THE COAST GUARD STATION
WHERE EARLY NEXT WEEK THERE WILL
BE MORE DEPORTATIONS STARTING UP
AGAIN, PERHAPS MORE DIFFICULT
THAN THE ONES THAT HAVE TAKEN
PLACE BEFORE.
THERE WILL BE SYRIANS GOING
BACK, POSSIBLY FAMILIES, WOMEN
AND CHILDREN.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, WILL THE
POPE'S VISIT MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
>> IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO SAY.
WILL THE EUROPEAN LEADERS TAKE
ANY NOTICE OF HIM?
AND I HAVE TO SAY I DON'T THINK
THEY WILL.
ONE THING THAT HE COULD DO
PERHAPS IS PUT SOME INFLUENCE
WITH POLAND, FOR EXAMPLE, WHICH
IS A BIG CATHOLIC COUNTRY WHICH
IS REFUSING TO TAKE ANY MIGRANT
AT ALL.
AND POLAND IS A VERY
INFLUENTIAL MEMBER AMONGST THE
FORMER COMMUNIST COUNTRIES AND
IS DOING NOTHING TO HELP.
IF POPE FRANCIS COULD USE HIS
INFLUENCE THERE AMONGST HIS OWN
CONGREGATION, THAT WOULD BE
WORTHWHILE.
>> Stewart: MALCOLM BRABANT,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Stewart: BEFORE THE POPE
TRAVELED TO GREECE, HE MET
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE BERNIE
SANDERS AT THE VATICAN.
SANDERS WENT TO ROME YESTERDAY
FOR A VATICAN CONFERENCE ON HIS
SIGNATURE ISSUE, INCOME
INEQUALITY.
SANDERS SAID HE TOLD THE POPE HE
WAS DOING "EXTRAORDINARY" WORK.
THE POPE TOLD REPORTERS, TO HIM,
GREETING SANDERS WAS A MATTER OF
GOOD MANNERS,NOTGETTING
INVOLVED IN POLITICS.
THIS AFTERNOON, SANDERS WAS BACK
CAMPAIGNING IN NEW YORK, THREE
DAYS BEFORE THE STATE'S
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY.
WITH POLLS SHOW HILLARY CLINTON
AHEAD IN NEW YORK, SHE SERVED
EIGHT YEARS AS SENATOR.
SHE CAMPAIGNED TODAY IN
CALIFORNIA, WHICH HOLDS ITS
PRIMARY IN JUNE.
REPUBLICAN FRONT RUNNER DONALD
TRUMP AND OHIO GOVERNOR JOHN
KASICH BOTH MADE APPEARANCES
TODAY IN UPSTATE NEW YORK.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ WAS IN
WYOMING, WHERE HE WAS EYEING 14
DELEGATES AT A STATE CONVENTION.
HE PREVIOUSLY WON NINE DELEGATES
IN CAUCUSES THERE.
JAPAN HAS DEPLOYED 20,000 ARMY
TROOPS TO HELP RESCUE EFFORTS
FOLLOWING TWO STRONG EARTHQUAKES
IN TWO DAYS, ON ITS SOUTHERN
ISLAND OF KYUSHU, MORE THAN 500
MILES FROM TOKYO.
THE MORE POWERFUL, MAGNITUDE
SEVEN QUAKE HIT THIS MORNING.
AUTHORITIES SAY AT LEAST 41
PEOPLE HAVE DIED, AND ABOUT
1,500 WERE INJURED.
DOZENS ARE BELIEVED TRAPPED IN
THE RUBBLE OF 200 COLLAPSED
BUILDINGS, AND 200,000 HOMES
HAVE LOST POWER.
AMONG THE BADLY DAMAGED
BUILDINGS IS THE 400-YEAR-OLD
KUMAMOTO CASTLE, ONE OF JAPAN'S
MOST HISTORIC LANDMARKS.
WATCH MY INTERVIEW WITH THE
C.D.C.'S DR. STEVEN KOCHIE ABOUT
THE AMBITIOUS PLAN TO ERADICATE
POLIO WORLDWIDE.
VISIT US ONLINE, AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: MANY OF THE NATION'S
MOST ECONOMICALLY DISTRESSED
POPULATIONS, AS MAPPED BY ZIP
CODE, ARE CONCENTRATED IN THE
SO-CALLED "RUST BELT" ACROSS THE
UPPER MIDWEST.
A CITY THAT HAS COME TO
SYMBOLIZE THE DISTRESS OF
DE-INDUSTRIALIZATION IS
YOUNGSTOWN, OHIO, WHICH STILL
SUFFERS FROM HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT
AND CRIME RATES.
BUT AFTER DECADES OF DECLINE,
THERE IS AN INNOVATION MOVEMENT
UNDERWAY THERE TO REBUILD HOMES,
REMOVE BLIGHT, AND ATTRACT
EMPLOYERS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KARLA MURTHY TAKES A LOOK AT HOW
THAT PLAN IS WORKING.
THIS STORY IS PART OF OUR
ONGOING REPORTING ON THE ISSUES
OF POVERTY AND OPPORTUNITY IN
AMERICA, CALLED "CHASING THE
DREAM."
>> Reporter: THIS HOUSE ON THE
SOUTHSIDE OF YOUNGSTOWN HAS BEEN
VACANT FOR EIGHT YEARS.
THE CITY CONDEMNED IT AFTER A
FIRE INSIDE.
NOW, IT'S BEING TORN DOWN.
ROBERT MORRIS LIVES NEXT DOOR.
HE SAYS HE'S GLAD TO SEE THESE
ABANDONED HOMES IN HIS
NEIGHBORHOOD FINALLY GET
DEMOLISHED.
>> THIS NEIGHBORHOOD RIGHT HERE,
THIS USED TO BE HIGH-CLASS OVER
HERE.
I MEAN, THIS WHOLE SOUTH
AVENUE CORRIDOR WAS ALL... IT
WAS NICE.
IT WAS REALLY NICE.
>> Reporter: THESE DEMOLITIONS
ARE PART OF A CITYWIDE PLAN TO
ELIMINATE BLIGHT AND REBUILD.
SINCE THE 1950s, YOUNGSTOWN'S
POPULATION HAS DECLINED BY 60%,
FROM ABOUT 168,000 TO 65,000,
AND IS STILL SHRINKING.
THOUSANDS OF EMPTY HOMES HAVE
BEEN LEFT BEHIND, CRIPPLING THE
HOUSING MARKET AND ERODING THE
SOCIAL FABRIC OF THIS ONCE
MIGHTY INDUSTRIAL BASE.
WHEN THE STEEL MILLS CLOSED IN
THE 1970s, YOUNGSTOWN LOST
40,000 GOOD PAYING JOBS.
TODAY, ALMOST 40% OF RESIDENTS
LIVE BELOW THE FEDERAL POVERTY
LINE, EARNING LESS THAN $24,300
A YEAR FOR A FAMILY OF FOUR.
>> WHAT'S A CITY TO DO AS A
CITY?
PICK ITSELF UP, DUST ITSELF OFF
AND START ALL OVER AGAIN, MOVE
FORWARD.
>> Reporter: HUNTER MORRISON IS
AN URBAN PLANNER WHO HAS WORKED
ON REBUILDING YOUNGSTOWN SINCE
2002.
HE SAYS THE PLAN STARTED WITH A
SIMPLE PREMISE: ACCEPT THAT THE
CITY WAS SMALLER.
>> IN AMERICA, THE ENTIRE
BUSINESS OF PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT IS BASED ON THE
PHENOMENA OF GROWTH.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS WHEN
COMMUNITIES ONE AFTER ANOTHER
SEE THEMSELVES SHRINKING?
>> Reporter: OVER THE LAST 14
YEARS, THIS NEW, SMALLER MINDSET
HAS BEEN THE GUIDING VISION FOR
THE CITY, WHICH TOOK STOCK OF
ITS ASSETS-- LIKE YOUNGSTOWN
STATE UNIVERSITY, WITH 14,000
STUDENTS.
THE CITY AND THE UNIVERSITY
DEVELOPED BLIGHTED LAND TO
CONNECT THE CAMPUS TO DOWNTOWN,
WHICH NOW HAS NEW HOUSING AND
MORE PLACES TO GO OUT.
>> TODAY, IF YOU TALK TO A
STUDENT, THEY GO DOWN TO THE
RESTAURANTS.
SOME OF THEM LIVE DOWNTOWN WHO
NEVER WOULD HAVE LIVED THERE
BEFORE.
>> Reporter: BUT BEYOND
DOWNTOWN, THE CITY DIDN'T HAVE
THE RESOURCES TO FIX ITS BROKEN
NEIGHBORHOODS.
FEWER RESIDENTS MEANS LESS TAX
REVENUE.
SO, IN 2009, THE CITY CREATED A
NEW NONPROFIT, THE YOUNGSTOWN
NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION, OR Y.N.D.C., IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE RAYMOND
JOHN WEAN FOUNDATION.
>> YOU COULD WALK TO MY HOUSE IF
YOU WANT TO KEEP GOING.
>> Reporter: IAN BENISTON IS THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
HE GREW UP IN YOUNGSTOWN.
HIS FATHER WORKED AT A STEEL
MILL UNTIL IT CLOSED IN 1980.
>> WE DON'T GO AROUND HERE
TALKING ABOUT UTOPIAN VISIONS.
WE'RE DEALING WITH THE REAL
BASICS HERE.
WE'VE JUST GOT TO GET
NEIGHBORHOODS CLEANED UP.
>> Reporter: THE Y.N.D.C. HAS AN
ANNUAL BUDGET OF $3 MILLION.
THE GROUP SURVEYED EVERY
NEIGHBORHOOD IN THE CITY TO
FIGURE OUT WHERE IT COULD MAKE
THE BIGGEST DIFFERENCE AND
CREATE MORE STABILITY.
>> OUR FOCUS, AS AN
ORGANIZATION, IS ON THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE MIDDLE.
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT HAVE MANY
SIGNS OF DISTRESS, BUT THEY'RE
NOT TO A POINT WHERE WE HAVE 70%
OR 80% VACANCY.
SO, THAT EVEN IN THE FUTURE, WE
DO AT LEAST HAVE THESE POCKETS,
IF NOTHING ELSE, OF HEALTHY
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE FIRST
NEIGHBORHOODS THE Y.N.D.C.
TARGETED IS CALLED IDORA, WHERE
A QUARTER OF THE HOUSES WERE
VACANT-- LIKE THIS ONE,
CURRENTLY BEING RENOVATED BY THE
Y.N.D.C.
TIFFANY SOKOL HAS BEEN
OVERSEEING THIS PROJECT.
>> WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO ACQUIRE A
LOT OF PROPERTIES AT ZERO COST,
EITHER THROUGH BANK DONATIONS OR
PRIVATE PERSONAL DONATIONS.
>> Reporter: MANY HOMES THE
Y.N.D.C. ACQUIRES ARE FORECLOSED
PROPERTIES AND ARE RENOVATED
WITH THE HELP OF AMERICORPS
VOLUNTEERS.
>> THERE'S AN ABUNDANCE OF
VACANT HOMES, BUT UNFORTUNATELY
THE QUALITY IS VERY LOW.
SO, PART OF WHAT WE'RE DOING
HERE IS TRYING TO RAISE THE
STANDARD AND RAISE THE QUALITY
OF HOMES AVAILABLE.
>> Reporter: A COUPLE BLOCKS
AWAY IS A HOUSE THE Y.N.D.C.
JUST FINISHED.
>> THIS ONE WAS BUILT IN THE
'70s, SO IT'S REALLY OUT OF
CHARACTER FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> Reporter: IT'S LISTED FOR
SALE FOR $40,000-- ABOVE
YOUNGSTOWN'S MEDIAN HOME PRICE
OF $31,000 BUT AFFORDABLE IN
THIS MARKET.
HAVE YOU HAD ANY PROBLEMS
GETTING PEOPLE TO BUY THE HOMES
THAT YOU'VE RENOVATED?
>> NO.
MOST OF OUR HOMES GENERALLY WE
END UP PRE-SELLING BEFORE WE ARE
EVEN DONE WITH THE
REHABILITATION.
>> Reporter: Y.N.D.C. HELPS
POTENTIAL BUYERS WHO HAVE LOW-
TO-MODERATE INCOMES THROUGH
HOUSING COUNSELING AND MORTGAGE
FINANCING.
IN THE PAST SIX YEARS IN IDORA,
137 ABANDONED HOMES HAVE BEEN
DEMOLISHED, 35 HOMES HAVE BEEN
RENOVATED AND SOLD, AND 88
OCCUPIED HOMES HAVE BEEN
REPAIRED.
>> THIS WAS A HOUSE WE FIXED,
TOO.
>> Reporter: TODAY, THE
OCCUPANCY RATE OF THIS STRIPPED
DOWN, REBUILT NEIGHBORHOOD IS
93%.
>> WAIT TILL YOU SEE IT.
IT'S PRETTY AWESOME.
>> Reporter: BENISTON SHOWED ME
ONE MORE FEATURE HE'S USING AS A
SELLING POINT FOR IDORA, THIS
NATURAL WATERFALL RIGHT IN THE
MIDDLE OF CITY.
>> WE HAD NINE VACANT HOMES
RIGHT BY THIS.
YEAH, BUT NOT ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: BROWNLEE WOODS IS
ANOTHER NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE THE
Y.N.D.C. WORKS.
NANCY MARTIN AND HER HUSBAND
RUSSELL HAVE LIVED HERE SINCE
1982 AND OVER THE YEARS WATCHED
PEOPLE LEAVE AS THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD DECLINED.
>> WE CAN DO ONE OF TWO THINGS.
YOU CAN EITHER SIT HERE ON THE
PORCH AND COMPLAIN, OR YOU GET
UP AND DO SOMETHING.
>> THESE ARE THE BENCHES WE JUST
PUT IN.
>> Reporter: SHE'S PRESIDENT OF
HER NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION AND
MEETS REGULARLY WITH THE
Y.N.D.C., WHICH ALSO HELPS
RESIDENTS DEVELOP THEIR OWN
NEIGHBORHOOD ACTION PLANS.
>> THEY BRING A LIST OF ALL THE
HOUSES THAT WE'RE WORKING ON,
AND WE GO THROUGH EACH ONE.
>> Reporter: ONE HOUSE THAT WAS
FALLING APART WAS OWNED BY AN
OUT OF TOWN BUSINESSMAN.
IAN BENISTON STEPPED IN.
>> AND HE TOLD HIM, "ARE YOU
GOING TO DO ANYTHING WITH THIS
PROPERTY?
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE NOT, WE'RE
TAKING IT."
>> Reporter: THE COMMUNITY IS
TAKING OVER THAT HOUSE, AND THE
Y.N.D.C. BROUGHT MORE THAN A
DOZEN OTHER HOUSES UP TO CODE IN
BROWNLEE WOODS.
>> WE ARE MAKING PROGRESS.
I MEAN, WE KNOW THAT IN TERMS OF
OWNER OCCUPANCY, VACANCY DATA.
HOWEVER, THERE ARE STILL LARGE
SWATHS OF THE CITY, THE MOST
DISTRESSED SWATHS, WHERE PEOPLE
ARE STILL LEAVING.
>> Reporter: IN THOSE AREAS OF
YOUNGSTOWN WITH HEAVY VACANCY,
THE FOCUS IS ON SIMPLY
ERADICATING BLIGHT WITH BOARD-
UPS, DEMOLITIONS AND CUTTING THE
GRASS.
ROBERT MORRIS IS HAPPY TO SEE
HIS NEIGHBORHOOD GETTING CLEANED
UP, BUT HE'S SKEPTICAL THINGS
WILL REALLY IMPROVE.
DO YOU THINK THIS AREA WILL EVER
BECOME WHAT IT ONCE WAS?
>> NO.
NO, I DOUBT IT.
NO.
IT'S OVER.
NO JOBS.
NOBODY GOT JOBS.
EVERYBODY'S OUT THERE TRYING TO
HUSTLE TO MAKE THEIR BUCK.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S... IT IS WHAT
IT IS.
>> I'M GOING TO GIVE MYSELF
MAYBE ANOTHER YEAR OR TWO HERE.
>> Reporter: DAWN GRIFFIN SAYS
SHE'S HAD A HARD TIME FINDING A
JOB IN YOUNGSTOWN AND THINKS
ABOUT LEAVING.
UNEMPLOYMENT IN YOUNGSTOWN IS
8.5%, 3.5% ABOVE THAN THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE.
GRIFFIN, A SINGLE MOTHER OF
THREE, REMEMBERS A BETTER TIME.
>> I THOUGHT WE WERE RICH, YOU
KNOW?
(LAUGHS)
AND WE WERE PRETTY WELL OFF, YOU
KNOW?
BUT WHAT IS HERE?
>> Reporter: SHE ALSO FEELS LIKE
THE CITY ISN'T DOING ENOUGH,
ESPECIALLY IN LOW-INCOME
NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE HERS, ON THE
EAST SIDE OF YOUNGSTOWN.
>> ONE OF MY QUESTIONS WAS,
"OKAY, YOU'RE REMOVING THE
BLIGHT, OKAY, BUT WHAT'S GOING
TO BE THERE?
AND IT'S NOTHING BUT A SLAB ON
CONCRETE THERE.
NO ONE WANTS TO INVEST IN THAT.
YOU CAN'T DO IT A LITTLE BIT,
YOU'VE GOT TO GO ALL THE WAY."
>> Reporter: I ASKED BENISTON
ABOUT THEIR CRITIQUE.
>> BOARDING UP HOMES, GRASS
CUTTING, HOW'S IT REALLY GOING
TO MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE?
>> THAT WILL IMPROVE THE QUALITY
OF LIFE FOR THE PEOPLE THAT ARE
LIVING THERE NOW, BUT BY NO
MEANS AM I TRYING TO SAY THAT IN
THE MOST DISTRESSED OF PLACES
JUST CUTTING GRASS AND BOARDING
UP THE HOUSES IS SUFFICIENT.
I'M SAYING IT'S THE REALITY OF A
LACK OF RESOURCES.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS WE
NEED MORE OF HERE WITHOUT A
DOUBT IS JUST JOBS.
THAT'S THE REALITY OF IT, THAT'S
WHY PEOPLE LEAVE.
SO, UNTIL WE CAN GET TO A POINT
WHERE WE'RE ATTRACTING,
DEVELOPING, CREATING-- EVEN
HERE, LOCALLY-- MORE JOBS, WE'RE
GOING TO BE STRUGGLING TO GET TO
WHERE WE NEED TO BE.
>> Reporter: PART OF
YOUNGSTOWN'S PLAN TO CREATE MORE
JOBS IS TO CHANGE ITS IMAGE AS A
CITY DOMINATED BY STEEL.
>> WE'RE STILL PRIMARILY
MANUFACTURING-FOCUSED, BUT THERE
ARE OTHER INDUSTRIES THAT ARE
EMERGING.
>> Reporter: SHARON WOODBERRY,
YOUNGSTOWN'S DIRECTOR OF
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
COMMUNITY PLANNING, IS TRYING TO
LURE TECHNOLOGY ENTREPRENEURS.
SHE POINTS TO "AMERICA MAKES," A
NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR 3D
PRINTING, AND ALSO THE
YOUNGSTOWN BUSINESS INCUBATOR
WHICH HAS CREATED ALMOST 400
JOBS AT TECH START-UPS IN
YOUNGSTOWN SINCE 2011.
BUT UNEMPLOYMENT IS STILL HIGH
HERE, RIGHT?
>> IT IS.
IT WAS A DECLINE OVER DECADES.
IT'S A REBUILDING THAT'S GOING
TO TAKE SOME SIGNIFICANT TIME.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF OBSTACLES
IN OLDER INDUSTRIAL COMMUNITIES.
>> Reporter: URBAN PLANNER
HUNTER MORRISON SAYS PROGRESS
MAY SEEM SLOW, BUT NOT WHEN YOU
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S HAPPENED
ACROSS THIS REGION.
>> THESE COMMUNITIES ARE VERY
MUCH LIKE NEW ORLEANS.
NEW ORLEANS LOST HALF ITS
POPULATION OVER A WEEKEND.
FLINT, CLEVELAND, YOUNGSTOWN,
DETROIT LOST IT OVER A
GENERATION.
IT'S A MAJOR TRAUMA TO A
COMMUNITY.
IT TAKES A LONG TIME TO GET OVER
IT.
>> Reporter: HOW DO YOU STAY
HOPEFUL?
IS IT A FALSE SENSE OF HOPE?
>> FOR ME IT'S NOT A FALSE OF
HOPE BECAUSE I HAVE A PRETTY
GOOD MEMORY, AND I KNOW, FOR
EXAMPLE, WHAT THIS NEIGHBORHOOD
LOOKED LIKE.
I'VE ALSO SEEN STREETS CHANGE,
WHERE, YOU KNOW, DOZENS OF
HOUSES HAVE BEEN REMOVED, OTHERS
HAVE COME BACK TO LIFE.
I FEEL GOOD ABOUT THE PROGRESS
THAT WE'VE MADE.
AM I SATISFIED WITH IT?
CERTAINLY NOT.
>> Stewart: IN THE RACE FOR THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION, HEADING INTO NEXT
TUESDAY'S BIG NEW YORK PRIMARY,
DONALD TRUMP LEADS TED CRUZ BY
MORE THAN 200 DELEGATES AND JOHN
KASICH BY 600.
TRUMP IS JUST ABOUT 500
DELEGATES SHY OF THE MAGIC
NUMBER OF 1,237 NEEDED TO SECURE
THE NOMINATION BEFORE THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY'S NATIONAL
CONVENTION IN CLEVELAND THIS
JULY.
THE NOMINATION COULD BE
CONTESTED AT THE CONVENTION, AND
IF THAT HAPPENS, THERE'S NO
GUARANTEE THE CANDIDATE WITH THE
MOST VOTES OR DELEGATES WALKING
IN, WILL WALK OUT THE NOMINEE.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JEFF GREENFIELD HAS SOME
THOUGHTS ABOUT THE FAIRNESS OF
THE PROCESS.
>> Reporter: DONALD TRUMP WILL
PROBABLY COME TO THE CLEVELAND
CONVENTION WITH A COUPLE HUNDRED
MORE DELEGATES THAN ANY
OTHER CANDIDATE, AND A COUPLE
MILLION MORE VOTES.
SO, EVEN IF HE'S SHORT OF A
DELEGATE MAJORITY, IT'S ONLY
FAIR THAT HE SHOULD BECOME THE
REPUBLICAN NOMINEE, RIGHT?
>> IN ALL FAIRNESS, WE'RE WAY
AHEAD IN DELEGATES.
I'M NOT SUPPOSED TO HAVE LESS
DELEGATES THAN A GUY I BEAT.
IT DOESN'T WORK THAT WAY.
>> Reporter: NOT SO FAST.
A LOT MORE REPUBLICAN VOTERS
CHOSE SOMEONE OTHER THAN TRUMP.
"ANYONE BUT TRUMP" WON A
MAJORITY OF VOTES IN THE FIRST
EIGHT REPUBLICAN CONTESTS.
IF TRUMP DOESN'T ACHIEVE A
DELEGATE MAJORITY ON THE
CONVENTION'S FIRST BALLOT,
REPUBLICAN PARTY RULES SAY MOST
OF HIS DELEGATES WILL BE
UNBOUND, FREE TO DO WHATEVER
THEY WANT.
>> IF TRUMP CAN PICK UP ENOUGH
UNBOUND DELEGATES TO COMMIT TO
HIM, THEN ON THE FIRST VOTE HE'D
GET 1,237, HE'D BE THE NOMINEE.
IF HE DOESN'T, THEN HE WOULD BE
SHORT, AND THEN YOU GO TO BALLOT
NUMBER TWO.
UNDER THE RULES, YOU CALL THE
ROLL AGAIN, AND YOU WOULD KEEP
CALLING THE ROLL UNTIL SOMEBODY
GETS TO THE MAJORITY OF
DELEGATES.
>> Reporter: THE CONVENTION
COULD NOMINATE SOMEONE WHO
DIDN'T EVEN RUN THIS YEAR.
IS THAT FAIR?
THE ANSWER IS: THERE ISN'T ANY
ONE ANSWER ABOUT THE RIGHT WAY
TO DECIDE WHO WINS AN ELECTION.
IN DIFFERENT PLACES, VERY
DIFFERENT RULES APPLY.
AND IN FACT, WITHOUT SOME
DISTINCTLY UNFAIR RULES, WE
WOULDN'T HAVE A COUNTRY AT ALL.
FOR INSTANCE, BEYOND THE
PRESIDENTIAL RACE, IN ALMOST
EVERY STATE, YOU CAN BE ELECTED
GOVERNOR OR SENATOR BY GETTING
MORE VOTES THAN THE NEXT
CANDIDATE, EVEN IF A MAJORITY OF
VOTERS WERE AGAINST YOU.
IN 2014, FOUR SENATORS AND TEN
GOVERNORS WON THAT WAY WITH
PLURALITIES.
TWO STATES, GEORGIA AND
LOUISIANA, REQUIRE A "RUNOFF" IF
NO ONE WINS A MAJORITY IN A
STATEWIDE RACE.
SO, IN THE 2014 RACE FOR SENATOR
IN LOUISIANA, INCUMBENT DEMOCRAT
MARY LANDRIEU NARROWLY EDGED
REPUBLICAN BILL CASSIDY IN
NOVEMBER BUT DIDN'T GET A
MAJORITY.
IN THE RUNOFF THAT FOLLOWED,
CASSIDY BEAT LANDRIEU
DECISIVELY.
CALIFORNIA NOW HAS ITS OWN KIND
OF RUNOFF FOR ALL STATEWIDE AND
CONGRESSIONAL RACES.
EVERY CANDIDATE, REGARDLESS OF
PARTY, RUNS ON THE SAME BALLOT.
THEN, THE TOP TWO FINISHERS FACE
OFF IN NOVEMBER; IT DOESN'T
MATTER IF BOTH ARE REPUBLICANS
OR DEMOCRATS OR INDEPENDENTS.
PROPONENTS SAY THIS ENCOURAGES
CANDIDATES TO APPEAL TO THE
CENTER OF THE POLITICAL
SPECTRUM; OPPONENTS SAY THE
SYSTEM DEPRIVES VOTERS OF A
CLEAR CONTRAST IN NOVEMBER, WHEN
IT REALLY COUNTS.
OR, CONSIDER HOW WE CHOOSE A
PRESIDENT.
AS EVERYONE LEARNED IN 2000, YOU
CAN LOSE THE WHITE HOUSE EVEN IF
YOU GET MORE POPULAR VOTES THAN
YOUR OPPONENT BECAUSE IT'S THE
ELECTORAL VOTES OF THE STATES
THAT MATTER.
EVERY STATE IS WINNER-TAKE-ALL
EXCEPT MAINE AND NEBRASKA.
IN 2012, BARACK OBAMA WON
FLORIDA BY LESS THAN 1% OF THE
VOTE, BUT HE GOT ALL 29
ELECTORAL VOTES.
MITT ROMNEY WON NORTH CAROLINA
BY BARELY 2% BUT GOT ALL 15
ELECTORAL VOTES.
IS THIS FAIR, OR SHOULD
ELECTORAL VOTES BE AWARDED
PROPORTIONALLY?
OR WINNER-TAKE-ALL BY
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT?
SHOULD WE EVEN HAVE AN ELECTORAL
COLLEGE ANYMORE?
AFTER ALL, STARTING EACH STATE
WITH TWO ELECTORAL VOTES BASED
ON THEIR U.S. SENATE SEATS GIVES
THE SMALL STATES MORE CLOUT THAN
THEIR POPULATION WOULD MANDATE.
IN FACT, ISN'T IT UNFAIR THAT
WYOMING HAS THE SAME POWER IN
THE SENATE AS CALIFORNIA, WHICH
HAS 60 TIMES THE POPULATION?
THE ANSWER IS, CREDIT-- OR
BLAME-- THE FOUNDING FATHERS.
WHEN THEY GATHERED IN
PHILADELPHIA TO WRITE THE
CONSTITUTION IN 1787, A CENTRAL
ISSUE WAS THE FEAR OF SMALL
STATES THAT THEY WOULD BE
DOMINATED BY THE BIG STATES.
NOT ONLY DID THEY INSIST ON
EQUAL REPRESENTATION IN THE
SENATE, BUT THEY MADE IT THE
ONLY PART OF THE CONSTITUTION
THAT CAN'T BE AMENDED.
IT'S RIGHT THERE IN ARTICLE V.
WITHOUT THIS OBVIOUSLY
"UNDEMOCRATIC" RULE, WE WOULDN'T
HAVE A COUNTRY.
SO, IS THERE A HARD AND FAST
RULE THAT WILL TELL YOU WHAT'S
FAIR?
ACTUALLY, IN PRACTICE, THERE IS.
FOR ALMOST EVERY ONE OF US,
WHATEVER PROCESS MOST HELPS THE
CANDIDATE WE WANT TO WIN IS
OBVIOUSLY, CLEARLY, THE FAIREST
OF THEM ALL.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: THE NUMBER OF
PRISONERS AT THE U.S. MILITARY
PRISON AT GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA,
IS DOWN TO 80, FOLLOWING TODAY'S
RELEASE OF NINE MEN WHO HAD BEEN
HELD FOR 14 YEARS WITHOUT
CHARGES.
ALL ARE FROM YEMEN, BUT DUE TO
UNREST AND AL QAEDA ACTIVITY
THERE, THEY WERE SENT TO SAUDI
ARABIA, WHERE THEY ALSO HAVE
FAMILY TIES.
AMONG THEM IS TARIQ BA ODAH, WHO
HAD PROTESTED HIS DETENTION BY
STAGING A HUNGER STRIKE.
HIS WEIGHT DROPPED FROM 160 TO
74 POUNDS, AND THE MILITARY
FORCE-FED HIM TO KEEP HIM ALIVE.
HIS ATTORNEY TELLS THE NEWSHOUR
THE TRANSFER ENDS "ONE OF THE
MOST APPALLING CHAPTERS IN
GUANTANAMO'S SORDID HISTORY."
THE HEAD OF BRITAIN'S
COMMUNICATIONS SPY AGENCY HAS
APOLOGIZED FOR THE AGENCY'S PAST
PREJUDICE AGAINST GAYS.
G.C.H.Q. CHIEF ROBERT HANNIGAN
TOLD A CONFERENCE HOSTED BY THE
HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP "STONEWALL"
YESTERDAY THAT BARRING GAYS FROM
WORKING AT THE AGENCY UNTIL THE
1990'S HAD BEEN WRONG, AND WAS
"THE NATION'S LOSS."
HANNIGAN PAID SPECIAL TRIBUTE TO
ALAN TURING, WHO HELPED BREAK
THE NAZI "ENIGMA" CODE DURING
WORLD WAR TWO AND WAS THE
SUBJECT OF THE 2014 MOVIE, "THE
IMITATION GAME."
TURING COMMITTED SUICIDE AFTER
BEING OUTED, CONVICTED OF
INDECENCY IN 1952 AND LOSING HIS
SECURITY CLEARANCE TO DO HIS
JOB.
HANNIGAN SAID THE AGENCY'S
TREATMENT OF THE COMPUTER GENIUS
HAD BEEN "HORRIFYING."
ONE OF AFRICA'S GREATEST
PHOTOGRAPHERS, MALICK SIDIBE,
HAS DIED.
THE ARTIST BEGAN HIS CAREER IN
THE LATE 1950s, DURING THE FINAL
YEARS OF FRENCH COLONIAL RULE IN
MALI.
HE WENT ON TO CAPTURE THE
YOUTHFUL NIGHTLIFE, FASHION, AND
CULTURE OF AN INDEPENDENT NATION
IN THE 1960s.
SIDIBE WOULD GO ON TO DISPLAY
HIS BLACK AND WHITE PHOTOS
AROUND THE WORLD, INCLUDING AT
THE GRAND PALAIS IN PARIS.
HE RECEIVED THE VENICE BIENNALE
GOLDEN LION AWARD FOR LIFETIME
ACHIEVEMENT IN 2007-- THE FIRST
AWARDED TO A PHOTOGRAPHER OR
AFRICAN ARTIST.
SIDIBE DIED FROM DIABETES-
RELATED COMPLICATIONS IN MALI'S
CAPITAL, BAMAKO, ON THURSDAY.
HE WAS 80.
FINALLY, CUBAN PRESIDENT
RAUL CASTRO SAYS THE RESTORATION
OF CAPITALISM IN CUBA IS NOT HIS
GOAL.
SPEAKING TO A CUBAN COMMUNIST
PARTY MEETING TODAY, CASTRO
PROMISED REFORMS TO IMPROVE THE
ECONOMY BUT SAID PRIVATE
ENTERPRISE WOULD REMAIN LIMITED.
FOLLOWING LAST MONTH'S VISIT
FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA, CASTRO
ALSO SAID HE IS COMMITTED TO
IMPROVING RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE
UNITED STATES.
CASTRO PLANS TO LEAVE OFFICE IN
2018.
HE SUCCEEDED HIS BROTHER FIDEL
IN 2008.
ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM, CHANGING
THE WAY DOCTORS ARE TAUGHT TO
TREAT PAIN TO HELP SLOW THE
NATION'S EPIDEMIC OF OPIOID
ADDICTION.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.